# Chapter 14: Clipboard and DND

The Wayland protocol includes several interfaces that allow clients to exchange information between them through selections (clipboard) or drag & drop sessions. The intricacies of how these interfaces function and their underlying rules are complex and won't be explained in detail in this chapter. Instead, this chapter focuses on practical aspects, leaving the low-level details to Louvre, as it handles these intricacies for you. If you wish to learn more about these topics, please refer to the documentation of the Wayland protocol or explore the Louvre::LDataDevice, Louvre::LDataSource, and Louvre::LDataOffer classes.

### Data Sharing

When clients want to share data with other clients, they create a **Louvre::LDataSource**. This data source contains a list of mime types representing the data they want to share. This data is then exchanged with other clients in the form of a **Louvre::LDataOffer** when their surfaces acquire keyboard focus or during a drag & drop session. The destination client can then request the source client to write the data for specific mim types into file descriptors and decide whether to retrieve the information.

As previously mentioned, Louvre handles all the data exchanging but provides you with control over high-level functionality, such as managing which clients can set the clipboard or initiate drag and drop sessions.

### Selections

In Wayland, the concept of "Selections" essentially refers to the clipboard. Clients can request to set the clipboard through **Louvre::LSeat::setSelectionRequest()**. Within this method, you can decide whether to allow the client to set the clipboard or not. To do this, you need to return **true** to permit the user to set the clipboard or **false** to deny it.

Let's create our own **Louvre::LSeat** subclass called **ESeat** to handle that request:

#### src/ESeat.h

```cpp
#ifndef ESEAT_H
#define ESEAT_H

#include <LSeat.h>

using namespace Louvre;

class ESeat : public LSeat
{
public:
    ESeat(Params *params);

    // Set clipboard request
    virtual bool setSelectionRequest(LDataDevice *device) override;
};

#endif // ESEAT_H
```

#### src/ESeat.cpp

```cpp
#include <LDataDevice.h>
#include "ESeat.h"

ESeat::ESeat(Params *params) : LSeat(params) {}

bool ESeat::setSelectionRequest(LDataDevice *device)
{
    // Let the client set the clipboard only if one of its surfaces has pointer or keyboard focus
    return (pointer()->focus() && pointer()->focus()->client() == device->client()) ||
           (keyboard()->focus() && keyboard()->focus()->client() == device->client());
}
```

So basically, we are allowing the client to set the clipboard only if one of its surfaces currently has pointer or keyboard focus. When the clipboard is set, any surface acquiring keyboard focus will be able to read the contents, for example, when the user presses 'Ctrl+v'.

You can also retrieve the current data selection source with **Louvre::LSeat::dataSelection()** and get the list of file descriptors for specific mime types with **Louvre::LDataSource::sources()**.

Lastly, don't forget to override its virtual constructor.

#### src/ECompositor.h

```cpp
class ECompositor : public LCompositor
{
public:

    // ...

    LSeat *createSeatRequest(LSeat::Params *params) override;
    
    // ...
};
```

#### src/ECompositor.cpp

```cpp
#include "ESeat.h"

// ...

LSeat *ECompositor::createSeatRequest(LSeat::Params *params)
{
    return new ESeat(params);
}
```

### Drag & Drop

Drag and drop sessions are managed within the **Louvre::LDNDManager** class, which can be accessed through **Louvre::LSeat::dndManager()**. Clients can request to start a session using **Louvre::LDNDManager::startDragRequest()**. If you don't want to allow the client to start the session, you should call **Louvre::LDNDManager::cancel()**.

During a session, the data source is automatically sent to any surface that gains pointer focus. To notify the destination client that the user has performed a drop, you should use **Louvre::LDNDManager::drop()**, as we have seen in Chapter 2 when the left pointer button is released.

Clients can also create a **Louvre::LDNDIconRole** to use as an icon during the session. This icon can be accessed with **Louvre::LDNDManager::icon()**. Not all clients create an icon tho, so you should always check if it returns **nullptr**. We have also managed updating the position of the icon in Chapter 8 during a pointer movement event.

Let's create our own **Louvre::LDNDManager** subclass called **EDNDManager**:

#### src/EDNDManager.h

```cpp
#ifndef EDNDMANAGER_H
#define EDNDMANAGER_H

#include <LDNDManager.h>

using namespace Louvre;

class EDNDManager : public LDNDManager
{
public:
    EDNDManager(Params *params);

    void startDragRequest() override;
};

#endif // EDNDMANAGER_H
```

#### src/EDNDManager.cpp

```cpp
#include <LSeat.h>
#include <LPointer.h>
#include <LKeyboard.h>
#include <LDataSource.h>
#include "EDNDManager.h"

EDNDManager::EDNDManager(Params *params) : LDNDManager(params) {}

void EDNDManager::startDragRequest()
{
    // Let the client start the session only if one of its surfaces has pointer or keyboard focus
    if ((seat()->pointer()->focus()  && seat()->pointer()->focus()->client()  == source()->client()) ||
        (seat()->keyboard()->focus() && seat()->keyboard()->focus()->client() == source()->client()))
    {
        seat()->pointer()->setDraggingSurface(nullptr);
    }
    else
        cancel();
}
```

So, just like with selections, we only allow the client to start a drag & drop session if one of its surfaces has pointer or keyboard focus; otherwise, we simply cancel it.

You may also notice we are calling **'Louvre::LPointer::setDraggingSurface(nullptr)'**. If you don't remember, this auxiliary method is used to maintain pointer focus on a surface that is being "dragged," as in the case when the user is selecting text. This prevents the pointer from losing focus if it accidentally leaves the surface. To prevent the current surface from retaining pointer focus, we set it to **nullptr**. Otherwise, no other surface would receive pointer focus during the drag & drop session, and they would not be able to receive the data source.

If you have come this far, congratulations! The next chapter is the final one, where we will explore how to handle output hotplugging events and TTY session switching in multi-seat systems. Hasta pronto!

<a href="md_md_tutorial_13.html">◀ Chapter 13: Cursor</a> || <a href="md_md_tutorial_15.html"> Chapter 15: Output Hotplugging ▶</a>